so
[Music]
hello and welcome to episode 29 of
i didn't expect the introduction to go
for as long as i said at the end of the
last one
so we're going to dive straight into the
reading today with no introduction
now in the previous chapter at the end
of the previous chapter
david wrote we quote we are channels of
information flow
so are histories and so are all
relatively
autonomous objects within histories but
we sentient beings are extremely unusual
channels
along which sometimes knowledge grows
end quotes okay and so that's important
because
at the beginning of chapter
12 a physicist's history of bad
philosophy with some comments on bad
science david writes
in a conversation
between himself and a
and a reader okay and the reader is
asking david
the the proverbial reader
the reader asks so i am an emergent
quasi-autonomous flow of information in
the multiverse
david you are okay so
let's have a short reflection on
what quasi-autonomous flow of
information the multiverse means
so emergent well emergent so not
um not at the fundamental reductionistic
level so a person emerges
from the laws of physics and from matter
behaving in certain ways we have
we have emerged we are complicated
objects we aren't fundamental like an
electron is fundamental
like a number is fundamental people can
have
fundamental effects on the universe but
as he says they were emergent
quasi-autonomous
quasi meaning somewhat somewhat
autonomous so
we are not entirely free i'm not like
superman i can't fly into the sky i
can't defy gravity i obey the laws of
physics
but given the laws of physics there are
choices before me
and my knowledge the knowledge that i
create
is the thing that determines the measure
of universes in which
a certain choice tends to have a higher
measure
compared to a lower measure there are
some places in the multiverse
where i turn around and begin to do
abstract art on the wall behind me
but brett hall is not the person that
tends to do that kind of thing
there might be some sliver of universes
where i just get bored with making
youtube videos
about the work of david deutsch but they
are so far as i can tell
highly unlikely highly unlikely because
i've never had
any impulse to do abstract art before
if i started doing abstract art right
now
that could possibly be explained by an
aneurysm or something like that
in an extremely small measure of
universes
that might occur so i'm quasi autonomous
in creating knowledge about
the things that i'm interested in and
usually only the things that i'm
interested in
if the laws of physics do not rule it
out then yeah it happens somewhere in
the multiverse but it's almost never in
equal measure
whenever there's a choice there's a
choice here between me doing what i'm
doing now
and any of an infinite number of other
things
now in the overwhelming majority of
universes
because i've preserved my personality
over time for many many years
i'm doing precisely this and i will
continue to do precisely this
in the majority of universes in some
smaller number i do something slightly
different and in some smaller number
again i do something
even smaller again the more and more
different those things are to what my
personality has historically been
the less likely and the smaller measure
of universes in which that's going to
occur
so i'm an emergent quasi-autonomous flow
of information the multiverse david says
well the reader says but david says
through the reader
and so that's what that means and flow
of information
so uh explaining how the multiverse
itself evolves over time is more about
the flow of information rather than well
it
increasingly will be more about the flow
of information
than it will be merely the movement of
particles
under the straightforward fundamental
laws of physics it would be
better explained by the flow of
information
and the creation of knowledge over time
now at the beginning of this chapter and
i won't read this part
david has this fictional conversation
with one of his readers
and the reader is summarizing what was
going on in the last chapter
and basically explaining how it is that
we know
the multiverse is the best explanation
for what's going on
in quantum theory and so i'll just read
the very last bit
where we're talking about where david's
talking about how
the way in which we understand multiple
universes exist
is because of observations of photons
that's what's going on
we are noticing where photons of light
are landing and where they're not
landing
and the reader says quote so that
trickle of photons through the
interferometer really does provide a
window on a vast multiplicity of
universes
and david says in response yes
it's another example of reach just a
small portion of the reach of quantum
theory
the explanation of those experiments in
isolation isn't as hard
to vary as the full theory but in regard
to the existence of other universes
it's incontrovertible all the same
reader
and that's all there is to it david yes
rita but then why is it that only a
small minority of quantum physicists
agree
david bad philosophy reader what's that
okay end quote so here we're about to
get into the discussion about
bad philosophy um and david's just
emphasizing there that only a
minority of quantum physicists agree
they don't do so far as i know
surveys of professional physicists very
often on what interpretation of quantum
theory they prefer
but even the most recent ones do not
show a majority of people
endorsing the multiverse theory most are
still
either instrumentalists or believe in
something like the copenhagen
interpretation something like that
and this is this is what i was taught
anyway in the 90s to 2000s
in with respect to quantum theory at
the universities that i went through
anyway it was still
the copenhagen interpretation or it was
some form of
there's no point asking no one
understands
or instrumentalism of course of course
just to be able to solve the problems
that's all that's important
that kind of thing okay so getting back
to the book
david writes quote quantum theory was
discovered independently by two
physicists who reached it from
different directions werner heisenberg
and erwin schrodinger
the latter gave his name to the
schrodinger equation which is a way of
expressing the quantum mechanical laws
of motion
both versions of the theory were
formulated between 1925
and 1927 and both explained motion
especially within atoms in new and
astonishingly
counter-intuitive ways heisenberg's
theory
said that the physical variables of a
particle do not
have numerical values instead they are
matrices large arrays of numbers
which are related in complicated
probabilistic ways to the outcomes of
observations
of those variables with hindsight we now
know that that
multiplicity of information exists
because a variable
has different values for different
instances of the object and the
multiverse
but at the time neither heisenberg nor
anyone else believed that his matrix
valued quantities literally described
what einstein called
elements of reality the schrodinger
equation when applied to the case of an
individual particle
described a wave moving through space
but schroedinger soon realized that for
two or more particles
it did not it did not represent a wave
with multiple crests nor could it be
resolved into two or more waves
mathematically it was a single wave in a
higher dimensional space
with hindsight we now know that such
waves describe
what proportion of the instances of each
particle are in each region of space
and also the entanglement information
among the particles
end quote okay some exposition
of that just on my behalf
okay so so here's the schrodinger
equation
and the schrodinger equation is a it's a
wave equation
um and that's at least one form of it
there are there's the
time dependent and the time independent
schrodinger equation we don't need to go
into the
details right now but this one's the
time dependent one
and it says that at some particular time
t
h gives information the h is the
hamiltonian gives information about the
energy of a particle which can take many
values simultaneously
and that's the upside that greek letter
there
we can graph for example the position
let's say for example
the position of some particle at some
particular time
and we get a graph a wave that evolves
over time in fact
here's the wikipedia animation of psi
for that particle
right there and so roughly speaking
what we're seeing here is that the
particle
is in all these places all at once
now these graphs these graphs of waves
are analogous to a picture of a snapshot
in time
of where a particle might be what the
range of energies is that it might have
or it's
momentum and so on it's not just a
single point
now this is physics that is different to
classical mechanics in classical
mechanics
at a certain point in time a particle
has a single numerical value
for a particular physical quantity like
position or energy or momentum or
velocity
that's the shading a picture physicists
have for a long time
uh physics has had for a long time and
indeed had for a long time before
quantum theory
been comfortable dealing with waves so
it was natural for them to interpret
the schrodinger wave equation it's
describing a wave moving through actual
space
but as david just said there it's kind
of misleading
it's a wave in a higher dimensional
space and what that means is a wave
across the multiverse not a wave in a
single universe
that's in one way of speaking anyway so
an observer in a
universe doesn't see a wave moving
through
space but although another way of
looking at quantum theory
as david has mentioned here is what has
come to be known as the heisenberg
petrol matrix mechanics
and so matrices look like this kind of
thing and i i've picked these ones
deliberately
these ones are known as the poorly
matrices
and the poorly matrices can be used to
represent a number of different
quantities but they're
in particular they can be used to
represent the spin of a particle and the
spin of a particle
is analogous to its angular momentum now
in classical mechanics if
something is spinning it's got a certain
angular momentum the rate at which it is
spinning and the difficulty with which
it might be hard to stop this object
from spinning
and that will have a single value but in
quantum mechanics
the spin of a particle is a matrices
it's not a single value
and so even if you don't understand what
a matrices and it's not important
um what is important is that it's not
just a single number
so the spin is not a single number in
particular when it comes to
something like an electron it can have
spin up or spin down so we say and
experiments can be done
showing that if you fire a particular
electron through this apparatus the
stern gulatch experiment
then it will um demonstrate having two
different spins
simultaneously over time now returning
to the book
i've got these two kind of pictures of
reality to some extent there's this
schrodinger idea of
particles being governed by a wave
equation
and so appear to have some sort of
wave-like property
and that's schroedinger's picture and
then heisenberg's picture
which is that the physical quantities
that
tell you information about a given
particle
are not single valued they have to be
represented by a matrices in some way
so david writes going back to the book
quote although schrodinger's
and heisenberg's theories seem to
describe very dissimilar worlds
neither of which was easy to relate to
existing conceptions of reality
it was soon discovered that if a certain
rule of thumb was added to each theory
they would always make identical
predictions moreover these predictions
turned out to be very successful
with hindsight we can state the rule of
thumb like this whenever a measurement
is made
all the histories but one cease to exist
the surviving one is chosen at random
with the probability of each
possible outcome being equal to the
total measure of all the histories in
which that outcome occurs
at that point disaster struck instead of
trying to improve and integrate those
two powerful but slightly forward
explanatory theories and to explain why
the rule of thumb worked
most of the theoretical physics
community retreated rapidly and was a
remarkable docility
into instrumentalism if the predictions
work they reasoned
why worry about the explanation so they
tried to regard quantum theory as being
nothing but
a set of rules of thumb for predicting
the observed outcomes of experiments
saying nothing else about reality this
move is still popular today
and it's known to its critics and even
some of its proponents as the
shut up and calculate interpretation of
quantum theory
pause there my reflection
yes so this idea the rule of thumb
where all of the hist when a measurement
happens
all of the histories but one cease to
exist
well this seems absurd doesn't it that
the theory itself is describing
there must be multiple histories there
must be all these different
ways in which the particle exists
simultaneously
all these positions it occupies all
these different moments it has
all these different energies it has that
really is what the theory is saying if
we take our theory seriously as a
description of reality well that's what
reality
is reality really is described by
particles that are simultaneously in
many different positions
but the rule of thumb says when you make
a measurement when you do an experiment
you only ever observe the thing
with one value it's only ever in one
place or with one energy or with one
particular momentum
and so the rule of thumb says well
although the theory said that all these
different
histories really existed all these
different variables existed
simultaneously
the experiment showed you there's only
one and so the rule of thumb is all of
them disappeared
except for one well that's absurd that
that that brings consciousness
into physics in a very fundamental way
that your act of observation
has destroyed the vast bulk of reality
of physical reality which is an
astonishing claim to make
and should not have been made but it was
and because it was just so unbelievable
then
what the physicists have said is well
let's just deny the reality of multiple
histories altogether
altogether deny multiple histories and
just say
use the formalism use the mathematical
formula in order to
make predictions of what's going to
happen next probabilistic predictions of
what's going to happen next
when what should have happened was
accept the fact all the histories exist
and continue to exist and we only ever
observe one of those
realities at any given time okay
returning the book
skipping just a little bit and david
writes both versions in other words
uh schrodinger and heisenberg's both
versions of quantum theory
were clearly describing some sort of
physical process that brought about the
outcome of experiments
physicists both through professionalism
and through natural curiosity
could hardly help wondering about that
process
so that physical process that brought
about the outcomes of experiments um
just me talking again remember the what
the
instrumentalist type people the shut up
and calculate type people were saying
was that the only purpose of quantum
theory
was to enable you to predict the outcome
of experiments
but there has to be a physical process
that produces the outcome
of the experiment after all and so
no wonder physicists through
professionalism
and natural curiosity could hardly help
wondering about that process what is
this physical process
and david writes but many of them tried
not to tried not to think
about it most of them went on to train
their students not to
this countered the scientific tradition
of criticism in regard to quantum theory
let me define bad philosophy as
philosophy that is not merely false
but actively prevents the growth of
other knowledge in this case
instrumentalism was acting to prevent
the explanations in schrodinger's
and heisenberg's theories from being
improved
or unified the physicist niels bohr
another of the pioneers of quantum
theory then developed an interpretation
of the theory which later became known
as the copenhagen interpretation
it said that quantum theory including
the rule of thumb was a complete
description of reality
boric skews the various contradictions
and gaps
by using a combination of
instrumentalism and studied ambiguity
he denied the possibility of speaking a
phenomena
as existing objectively paused there my
reflection so
boar denied the possibility
of speaking of phenomena as existing
objectively
does that sound familiar now this
predates
the french postmodernists but
it had a strong influence on philosophy
and a bad influence on philosophy once
the physicist
the hard-nosed physicist the
supposed the supposed refinement of
intellectual
excellence that was physics once the
practitioners there
start denying the existence of objective
reality
we've got problems because those people
were respected
einstein was one of the most famous
people
of the early 20th century he was revered
and respected
his colleagues therefore also
were showered in the similar sort of
respect and reverence
especially among the rest of the
intellectual
community in the academic community so
if one of their own
one of the great physicists
and and physicists were of course
respected
and trusted and well liked and revered
because
what the amazing things they predicted
worked
the amazing thing they predicted worked
they they predicted theories of rocketry
and the rockets worked
they predicted theories about ever
better bombs and the bombs work they
predicted theories about
nuclear reactors and nuclear reactors
work etc et cetera what they said
seemed to carry with it await because of
how their theories worked
now despite the fact the epistemology
there is all wrong
nonetheless nonetheless we have this
culture of reverence for the words of
physicists
in particular and physicists can
sometimes be regarded as the new priests
and so unfortunately if the priest
starts saying things like
objective reality
might not exist we have a real problem
we have a a deeper problem than merely
false science or false claims because
we have the beginnings of a bad
philosophy if we deny the existence of
objectivity and of objective reality
then we've got nothing to argue over
we've got no reason to debate and debate
is all about
something that isn't solid and we can
never arrive at true answers
if there's nothing true to argue about
okay let's go back to the book david
wrote
of boar of neil's ball quote
he denied the possibility of speaking a
phenomena as existing objectively
but said that only the outcomes of
experiments should count as phenomena
he also said that although observation
has no access to the real essence of
phenomena
it does reveal relationships between
them and that in addition
quantum theory blurs the distinction
between observer
and observed once again end quote
let's just reflect on that for a moment
so it blurs the distinction according to
ball between observer and observed
that might also sound familiar to some
people it's a somewhat
buddhist notion now buddhism
may certainly have truth within it
especially when it comes to studying the
subjectivity of the mind studying one's
own mind introspecting etc
that aside that the useful content of
buddhism
is not encapsulated by this claim
that there is a blurring in this sense
between the observer and the observed
despite this it's this kind of thing
which has been grabbed onto by mystics
of all stripes and new age type people
as cashing out their own spurious claims
because the pioneers of quantum theory
struggling to understand this
said some very unfortunate things but
they were just the pioneers they didn't
understand quantum theory well enough
and so they were apt at saying sometimes
ridiculous things
especially in the case of boar let's go
back to the book and david writes quote
as for what would happen if one observer
performed a quantum level observation on
another
he bore avoided the issue which became
known as the
paradox of vigna's friend after the
physicist eugene wigner
in regard to the unobserved processes
between observations
where both schrodinger's and
heisenberg's theories seem to be
describing a multiplicity of histories
happening at once
ball proposed a new fundamental
principle of nature the principle of
complementarity it is said that a cancer
phenomena could only be stated in
classical language meaning that
language that assigned single values to
physical variables at any one time
but classical language could be used
only in regard to some variables
including those that had just been
measured one was not permitted to ask
what values the other variables had thus
for instance in response to the question
which path did the photon take in the
mark zender interferometer
the reply would be that there is no such
thing as which path when the path is not
observed
in response to the question then how
does the photon know which way to turn
the final mirror
since this depends on what happened on
both paths the reply would be an
equivocation called
particle wave duality the photon is both
an extended
non-zero volume and localized zero
volume object
at the same time and one can choose to
observe either attribute but not both
pause there my reflection yes this is
standard stuff in textbooks
the typical physics textbook high school
undergraduate level
when introducing quantum theory to
people
generally falls back onto particle wave
duality stuff
and this is in fact what the majority of
science popularizes today
continue to regurgitate and so
it sounds plausible and attractive
that because it seems as though
given classical type experiments
where there are certain observations we
can make in quantum theory that seem to
show that
particles like electrons really do act
like particles
some of the time they can collide into
things
they can bounce off things this is what
particles do
they carry momentum with them
that this is evidence for their particle
type nature but there are other
experiments you can do
interference experiments passing single
electrons through
narrow slits and we can then observe
interference effects and these
interference effects
are proof positive so it's said of
a wave type nature and so therefore we
just say
electrons are waves and particles at the
same time
to some people that's satisfactory
especially when you're introduced to
this the first time and everything else
is really complicated and difficult to
understand
well being waved away with oh it's a
wave in a particle at the same time
can shut some people up but of course if
you understand what david just said
there
that an object like a photon
or an electron or any other particle is
sometimes not sometimes it is
simultaneously
of near zero volume it's a particle
localized
and extended throughout all of space
non-zero volume team
simultaneously well this this violates
logic but of course some of the early
pioneers of quantum theory never people
today will say we
there's something deeper than logic
which is quantum theory
and so you need a new kind of logic to
understand what's going on now that's a
violation of reason
if it the law of the excluded middle
is something we should want to preserve
something can't both be
x and not x at the same time
either here i am here now
delivering another episode of topcast
or i'm not i'm not simultaneously doing
both you might say well in the
multiverse i'm somewhere else
now here right now in this universe
speaking to you either it's me he is
speaking to you right now
or this is not happening it's one or the
other i'm not both here doing this and
not doing this at the same time
but in quantum theory some people want
to say that that in fact is what's going
on
that particles are both in one place and
in many places at the same time
okay returning to the book and david
writes quote
often this is expressed this concept of
the extended through space and localized
at one point
is expressed in the saying it is both a
wave and a particle simultaneously
ironically
there is a sense in which those words
are precisely true
in that experiment the entire
multiversal photon is indeed an extended
object a wave so across the multiverse
we have this and this has been explained
in my
previous videos so the wave is extended
through the multiverse
while instances of it particles and
histories are localized
unfortunately that is not what is meant
in the copenhagen interpretation
there the idea is that quantum physics
defies the very foundations of reason
particles have mutually exclusive
attributes period
and it dismisses criticisms that the
idea is invalid because they constitute
attempts to use classical language
outside its proper domain namely
describing the outcome of experiments
okay now i'm skipping a little bit back
to the book and david writes
for decades various versions of all that
all this
vagueness with respect to quantum theory
were taught as fact
the anthropocentrism the instrumentalism
and all
in university physics courses and even
today i should say
few physicists claim to understand it
none did
and so students questions were met with
such nonsense as
if you think you've understood quantum
mechanics then you don't
inconsistency was defended as
complementarity
or duality parochialism was hailed as
philosophical sophistication
thus the theory claimed to stand outside
the jurisdiction of normal
i all modes of criticism a hallmark of
bad philosophy
its combination of vagueness immunity
from criticism and the prestige
and perceived authority of fundamental
physics open the door
to countless systems of pseudoscience
and quackery supposedly based on quantum
theory
its disparagement of plain criticism and
reason has been classical
and therefore illegitimate has given
endless comfort to those who want to
define reason
and embrace any number of irrational
modes of thought thus quantum theory
the deepest discovery of the physical
sciences has acquired a reputation for
endorsing practically every mystical and
occult doctrine
ever proposed end quote
well that's a that's a brilliant david
deutsch
passage there and it just sums up
uh in a very forceful way
how quantum theory this this amazing
pinnacle of human intellectual endeavor
the truth of quantum theory what quantum
theory has allowed us to achieve
as a species new technologies new ways
of understanding reality
ironically because of the way it began
with vagueness and the the the immunity
from criticism that some of the
practitioners
um couch these ideas in has
caused quantum theory to in the minds of
some people
justify all manner of weird stuff
and so new age type people certain kind
of
buddhist thinkers quacks of various
kinds
cranks of various kinds dishonest
interlocutors
and as we will see certain kinds of
philosophers
point to quantum theory as
a justification for their own nonsense
that in some way because of the language
used by the pioneers of quantum theory
the unfortunate language the unfortunate
vagueness
that therefore their crazy claims
are cashed out in some way by
the crazy claims of the pioneers or
quantum theory but the crazy claims
of the pioneers of quantum theory or the
bad claims of the pioneers of quantum
series
were made for in many ways honest
reasons
they were honestly trying to find the
truth
and people today who use and point to
quantum theory are
oftentimes being quite dishonest
dishonestly repurposing
errors made in the past and presenting
them as fact
and they're not fact admittedly some of
these people are
innocently simply ignorant but a lot
aren't a lot of not
all right back to the book david writes
not every physicist
accepted the copenhagen interpretation
or its descendants
einstein never did the physicist david
baume struggled to construct an
alternative that was compatible with
realism
and produced a rather complicated theory
which i regard as the multiverse theory
in heavy disguise
though he was strongly opposed to
thinking of it in that way and in dublin
in 1952
shrinia gave a lecture in which at one
point he jocularly warned his audience
that what he was about to say might seem
lunatic it was that when his equation
seems to be describing several different
histories
they are not alternatives but really
happens simultaneously
we'll say that again when his equation
seems to be describing several different
histories they are
not alternatives but all really
happen simultaneously this is the
earliest known reference to the
multiverse
he was an imminent physicist joking that
he might be considered mad
why for claiming that his own equation
the very one for which he had won the
nobel prize
might be true end quote
um that's another brilliant david
deutsch
very brief paragraph they're talking
about schrodinger so schrodinger
one of the discoveries of quantum theory
early pioneers
1930s has said that his own equation
that explains what's going on with
subatomic particles he said
that these that these equations describe
things describe particles
with many different histories
simultaneously
that occupy many different positions
and these alternatives really do happen
he said
and then david writes that he was
he was joking that he might be
considered mad why
for claiming that his own equation the
very one for which he'd won the nobel
prize
might be true okay back to the book
david writes schrodinger never published
that lecture and seems never to have
taken the idea further
five years later and independently the
physicist hugh everett published a
comprehensive theory of the multiverse
now known as the everett interpretation
of quantum theory it took several more
decades because before everett's work
was even noticed
by more than a handful of physicists
even now that it has become well known
it is endorsed by only a small minority
i've often been asked to explain this
unusual phenomenon unfortunately i know
of no entirely satisfactory
explanation but to understand why it is
perhaps not quite as bizarre and
isolated an event as it may appear
one has to consider the broader context
of bad philosophy
error is the normal state of our
knowledge and there's no disgrace
there's nothing bad about false
philosophy
problems are inevitable but they can be
solved by imaginative critical
thought that seeks good explanations
that is good philosophy
and good science both of which have
always existed in some measure
for instance children have always
learned language by making criticising
and testing conjectures
about the connection between words and
reality they could not possibly learn in
any other way as i shall explain in
chapter 16.
bad philosophy has always existed too
for instance children have always been
told
because i say so although it is not
always intended as a philosophical
position it is worth analyzing it as one
for in four simple words it contains
remarkably many themes of
false and bad philosophy first it is a
perfect example of a bad explanation
it could be used to explain anything
second
one way it achieves its status is by
addressing only the form of the question
and the substance it is about who said
something not what they said
that is the opposite of truth seeking
third it reinterprets a request for a
true explanation
why should something or other be as it
is as a request for a justification
what entitled you to assert that it is
so which is the justified true belief
chimera
fourth it confuses the non-existent
authority for ideas with human authority
power a much troubled path in bad
political philosophy
and fifth it claims why this means to
stand outside the jurisdiction
of normal criticism okay and i'm just
skipping a little bit where david writes
about empiricism
empiricism is a false philosophy but it
at least allowed progress to continue
but then empiricism
got taken too literally and it became
positivism
and positivism was about eliminating
from science
anything that could not be derived from
observations
and so but still this didn't
cause um this still wasn't really bad
philosophy
this wasn't bad this was merely false
philosophy because progress was still
able to
continue i might just um
go through david's uh little anecdote
here about ernst mark
where he writes quote for instance the
physicist ernst mark father of ludwig
mark of the mark zender interferometer
was also a positive philosopher
influenced by einstein
spurring him to eliminate untested
assumptions from physics including
newton's assumption that time flows at
the same rate for all observers
that happened to be an excellent idea
but mark's positivism
also caused him to oppose the resulting
theory of relativity
essentially because it claimed that
space-time really exists even though it
can't be directly observed
mark also resolutely denied the
existence of atoms
because they were too small to observe
we laugh at their silliness now
because we have microscopes that can see
atoms but the role of philosophy
should have been to laugh at it then i'm
skipping a little bit
david mentions that einstein rejected
positivism because he was a realist
and so einstein never accepted the
copenhagen interpretation
and david wonders out loud if einstein
took positivism more seriously
would he perhaps have included that
space time that thing that general
relativity
um forced us to endorse the reality of
would he himself have dismissed the idea
of
as space time really existing okay so
david describes the the leap from
positivism this idea that
only that which can be derived from
observations
should be considered meaningful in
science
and this led to a denial of physical
reality in general
thomas kuhn and david wrote of thomas
kuhn quote
thomas kern wrote quote there is a step
which many philosophers of science wish
to take and which i refuse
they wish that is to compare scientific
theories as representations of nature
as statements about what is really out
there end quote of kuhn
david continues positivism degenerated
into
logical positivism which held that
statements not verifiable by observation
are not in
not only worthless but meaningless this
doctrine threatened to sweep away not
only explanatory scientific knowledge
but the whole of philosophy
in particular logical positivism itself
is a political theory
and it cannot be verified by observation
hence it asserts its own meaninglessness
as well as that of all other philosophy
the logical positivists
tried to rescue their theory from that
implication for instance by calling it
logical
as distinct from philosophical but in
vain
then wittgenstein embraced the
implication declared all a philosophy
including his own
to be meaningless he advocated remaining
silent about philosophical problems
and although he never attempted to live
up to that aspiration he was held by
many as one of the greatest geniuses
of the 20th century end quote my
reflection
even today having gone through
philosophy myself wittgenstein was
absolutely
regarded as the preeminent genius by
even my favorite lecturers now i never
really understood i think he has a few
quotes
it depends upon the way in which you
read him
and wittgenstein contradict himself
there's the
so-called early wittgenstein and a late
wittgenstein his
way of speaking about philosophy has
entered
the philosophical tradition in many
places for instance people talk about
word games
whenever you hear this term word games
that's from wittgenstein
wittgenstein thought that one function
of language was to communicate
but what we are doing as people is we're
playing word games with one another and
so when scientists are talking they're
engaged in a certain kind of word game
which is very different to what a parent
and a child might engage in
or a patient a doctor might engage in so
yes this was wittgenstein's view the
later wickenstein the earlier
wittgenstein
who wrote tractatus philosophicus
believe that language served the
function
of simply describing physical reality
and that's it
and of course only that which could be
observed was
worthy of being a part of
science and rational discourse
and i i think i've mentioned before that
wittgenstein had this view of his own
philosophy as being like
a a ladder which one uses to climb out
of a well
and once you've used the latter to climb
out of the world you can discard the
latter as well
and so that's what he thought of his own
philosophy at the end of the tractatus
he has that famous line
whereof one cannot speak thereof one
should be silent
or thereof one must be silent now on the
one hand
could be the case that it's as strong as
that what that means is that we should
be silent about all philosophical
problems
and of course that's ridiculous uh that
that
closes off knowledge progress in many
many areas because we need
progress in philosophy and this is one
of the great debates between
karl popper and ludwig wittgenstein
they didn't get on particularly well but
papa took his ideas seriously and
criticized him in many places you can go
back through my podcast
topcast and there is an audio version of
me describing mr popper's problems i
think that's the title of it
and about some of the great debates
between
popper and wittgenstein but this
this quote uh wittgen signs at the end
of the tractatus
where one cannot speak thereof
one must be silent also has this other
um meaning like i say people have
different readings of wittgenstein
because he was so
vague which isn't a good quality right
it's it's kind of theology but
philosophers love this they love
referring to the original texts
and trying to grapple with what did he
really mean but one reading of that
quote is
for him for him not
to be in a position of dismissing
metaphysics certain parts of philosophy
but him simply saying that
although there is this reality beyond
which
we don't have a way of speaking it's
real
but it transcends the ability
of language to capture and so
you know he wouldn't necessarily reject
something like belief in god
he would simply say well it might very
well be real but there's no point
engaging in debate about it there's no
point getting upset and fighting about
it
because we don't have the language to
capture
it transcends human intellect now this
is not a position i hold
i i am a universalist with respect
to the mind and so i think there is
nothing that can't be understood
if we simply put our minds to it if
we're interested enough to tackle that
idea
tackle that problem but wittgenstein's
position on that
is at least interesting and it kind of
leads into
some other linguist philosophers the
sapir wharf hypothesis is what i'm
thinking of
and these guys basically say that
language is like a set of blinkers that
you put on and it constrains the way in
which you can
possibly think about the world and it's
in that same tradition of
of language is everything and so
philosophy
today very much even in the analytic
tradition
we have on the one hand the continental
and post-modernist type tradition and we
have the analytic tradition
the analytic tradition is still very
much centered on
linguistics and language and david's
about to get
into that um and so let's just go back
to that david wright's quote one might
have thought that this would be the
nadir of philosophical thinking but
unfortunately there were greater depths
to plum
during the second half of the 20th
century mainstream philosophy lost
contact with
and interest in trying to understand
science as it was actually being done
or how it should be done following
wittgenstein the predominant school of
philosophy
for a while was linguistic philosophy
whose defining tenant
was that what seemed to be philosophical
problems are actually just puzzles
about how words are used in everyday
life and that philosophers
can meaningfully study only that
next in a related trend that originated
in the european europe enlightenment but
spread all over the west
many philosophers moved away from trying
to understand anything
they actively attacked the idea not only
of explanation reality but of truth and
reason
merely to criticize such attacks for
being self-contradictory like logical
positivism which they were
is to give them far too much credence
for at least the logical positivists and
wit concern were incident
in making a distinction between what
does and does not make sense
albeit that they advocated a hopelessly
wrong one
one currently influential philosophical
movement goes under various names
such as postmodernism deconstructionism
and structuralism depending upon
historical details that are unimportant
here
it claims that because all ideas
including scientific theories are
conjectural
and impossible to justify they are
essentially arbitrary
they know more than stories known in
this context is narratives
mixing extreme cultural relativism with
other forms of anti-realism
it regards objective truth and falsity
as well as reality
and knowledge of reality as mere
conventional forms of words
that stand for an ideas being endorsed
by a designated group of people
such as an elite or consensus or by a
fashion
or other arbitrary authority and it
regards science
and the enlightenment is no more than
one such fashion and the objective
knowledge claimed by science as an
arrogant
cultural conceit perhaps inevitably
these charges are true of post-modernism
itself
i'm just inserting my own commentary
here and
the cultural marxism that exists now the
grievance study stuff that i've been
talking about
where this has become even more
pronounced okay so i'll just go back and
um reread this section
david writes quote perhaps inevitably
these charges are true of post-modernism
itself it is a narrative that resists
rational criticism or improvement
precisely because it rejects all
criticism
as mere narrative creating a successful
post-modernist theory
is indeed purely a matter of meeting the
criteria
of the post-modernist community which
have evolved to be complex
exclusive and authority based nothing
like that is true of rational ways of
thinking
creating a good explanation is hard not
because of what anyone has decided
but because there is an objective
reality that does not meet anyone's
prior expectations
including those of authorities the
creators of bad explanations such as
myths
are indeed just making things up but the
method of seeking good explanations
creates an engagement with reality not
only in science but in good philosophy
too
which is why it works and why it is the
antithesis
of concocting stories to needs made up
criterion
although there have been signs of
improvement since the late 20th century
one legacy of empiricism that continues
to cause confusion and that has opened
the door to a great deal of bad
philosophy
is the idea that it is possible to split
a scientific theory
into its predictive rules of thumb on
the one hand and its assertions about
reality sometimes known as
interpretation on the other this does
not make sense because
as with conjuring tricks without an
explanation
it is impossible to recognize the
circumstances under which a rule of
thumb is supposed to apply
and it especially does not make sense in
fundamental physics because the
predicted outcome of an observation
is itself an unobserved physical process
paused my reflection
and again this whole idea of logical
positivism
and various other kinds of philosophy
that assert that we cannot make
meaningful statements about that which
are unobserved those things that are
unobserved
would completely dismiss the
vast bulk of science almost everything
interesting in science is something we
cannot observe the evolution of species
over time
david's favorite example of dinosaurs no
one's going to observe a dinosaur we're
only going to observe fossils
the big bang no one's going to observe
the big bang
we observe things going on 13 and a half
billion years afterwards fusion in the
core of stars
subatomic particles smaller than protons
quarks and things i don't know maybe we
can see quarks
neutrinos um planets that
we have not yet observed orbiting stars
that we cannot yet see
there is a whole bunch of things that we
can't observe but which we know must be
real
given our best explanations given what
we know about reality
okay in the next bit david goes through
the dinosaur interpretation of fossils
that i just mentioned
and i've mentioned this many times over
the beginning of infinity
series so i won't go through it all
there but certainly worth reading there
in chapter
12. so i'm skipping those few pages
and instead we'll go to the section on
psychology
which has had a lot of influence
actually
i think in the intellectual community
ever since the beginning of infinity was
published in fact it was only a couple
of days ago
i myself received a paper from some
psychologists working
at the university of new south wales my
old alma mater
specifically talking about how how
deutsches worked in the beginning
infinity
and elsewhere had influenced their own
thinking about psychology
and they were psychologists so let's
read what david writes about this
let me give an example from a distant
field psychology
i have mentioned behaviorism which is
instrumentalism applied to psychology
it became the prevailing interpretation
in that field for several decades
and although it is now largely
repudiated research in psychology
continues to downplay explanation
in favor of stimulus response rules of
thumb
thus for instance it is considered good
science to conduct
behavioristic experiments to measure the
extent to which a human psychological
state
such as say loneliness or happiness is
genetically coded
like eye color or not such as date of
birth now there
are some fundamental problems with such
a study
from an explanatory point of view first
how can we measure
whether different people's ratings of
their own psychological state
are commensurable that is to say
some proportion of people claiming to
have happiness level eight
might be quite unhappy but also
pessimistic they cannot imagine
anything better so let's pause down my
reflection show just to just to hammer
that home a little bit
two people could have exactly the same
psychological state
and if you ask them you ask of you know
let's say
you've got yes you've got john and joe
and john and joe are sitting there
and they both claim they're both in in
objective
reality have the same psychological
state and you ask them both
on a scale of one to ten ten being the
highest how happy are you
john might very well say eight and joe
might very well say six
they don't have the same standards we
don't know what the knowledge is that
they've got in their mind about
how they should be feeling at any
particular point okay so
that that's a serious problem that
epistemology
knowledge about knowledge is going to
affect
their ratings of their own subjective
experience but this is what psychology
sometimes attempts to do it attempts to
try to get at a person's
inner mind by asking them questions and
having them do surveys
assessing the contents of their own mind
but how objective are they how accurate
are they
or how commensurate is it that their
assessment
is going to agree with the assessment of
someone else their standards are going
to be the same as someone else's
no answer of course right so just
continuing
david writes quote and then some of the
people who claim only
level three might in fact be happier
than most but have succumbed to a craze
that promises
extreme future happiness to those who
can learn to chant in a certain way
and second if we were to find that
people with a particular gene
tend to rate themselves happier than
people without it
how can we tell whether the gene is
coding for happiness perhaps it is
coding for
less reluctance to quantify one's
happiness
perhaps the gene in question does not
affect the brain at all but only how a
person looks
and perhaps better looking people are
happier on average because they are
treated better by others
there is an infinity of possible
explanations but the study is not
seeking
explanations it would make no difference
if the experimenters tried to eliminate
the subjective self-assessment
and instead observed only happy and
unhappy behavior
such as facial expressions or how often
a person whistles a happy tune
the connection with happiness would
still involve comparing subjective
interpretations
which there is no way of calibrating to
a common standard
say that again the connection with
happiness would still involve
comparing subjective interpretations
which there is no way of calibrating to
a common standard
but in addition there would be an extra
level of interpretation
some people believe that behaving in
happy ways is a remedy for happiness
so for those people such behaviors might
be a proxy for
unhappiness pause there my reflection so
just
notice that this is a theory
in this positive psychology movement
that you can
behave your way to happiness so if you
feel unhappy then you should pretend to
be happy and eventually you'll be more
and more happy
you should smile more often you should
regard yourself as being happy even if
you don't feel
happy and eventually that will be its
own reward
and so that's a problem for studies like
this as well
david goes on quote for these reasons no
behavioural study can detect whether
happiness is inborn or not
science simply cannot resolve that issue
until we have explanatory theories about
what objective attributes people are
referring to
when they speak of their happiness and
also about what physical chain of events
connects genes to those attributes
so how does explanation free science
address the issue
first one explains that one is not
measuring happiness directly but only a
proxy such as the behaviour of marking
check boxes on a scale called happiness
all scientific measurements use chains
of proxies but as i explained in
chapters two and three
each link in the chain is an additional
source of error and we can avoid fooling
ourselves only by criticizing the theory
of each link
which is impossible unless an
explanatory theory links the proxies to
the quantities of interest
that is why in genuine science one can
claim to have measured a quantity
only when one has an explanatory theory
of how
and why the measurement procedure should
reveal its value
and with what accuracy pause there i'll
end
this episode here but that's an
important point there
to end on the explanatory theory itself
will tell you what quantities can be
measured and also as david says
elsewhere
a physical quantity quoted without
uncertainty
is strictly meaningless so if someone
just said
you could just say my weight is 65
kilograms well
to a physicist one wants to know on what
kind of scale
that has been measured you know is it
65.0
is it 65.0001
is it 64.9 um these the scale would give
these
we could give this sort of information
so if you just say 65 well that doesn't
really tell us much at all
so we've got some more left to go with
this chapter so it'll be episode
3 for chapter 12
and we'll finish this in the next
episode
of topcast once more thank you to
people who are supporting me on patreon
um i have
i think i'm getting close to 10 patreons
right now but thank you so much to
everyone who is
it means a lot and certainly helping me
continue with this series which has many
more episodes to go
but until the next episode
[Music]
you